# Bikesharing Analysis
There is promising data to suggest that a city bike system could be integrated into Des Moines, Iowa. There are several factors based on the existing bike sharing system in New York City that would point to this success. 

## Dashboard
[link to dashboard](https://public.tableau.com/profile/jennifer3839#!/vizhome/Challenge_15794877941260/CitibikeCustomers)

## Citibike in New York City
### The Business
First, let’s look at citibike’s business model. The majority of customers are subscribers to the service rather than a one time customer. This data from August, which can be considered peak tourism season in New York, tells us that although a portion of the profits come from non subscribers, most can be contributed to regular users who are not tourists. We can assume these are local users who repeatedly use these bikes. An explanation for this use could be subscribers who use citibike to perform their daily commute. This explanation is supported by the peak hours of use in the data which are at 8am and 6pm during the day. Typical work hours are 9-5 or 9-6. Furthermore, there is a gradual upward trend of length of usership based on year of birth. It appears as though people who were born from 1992 to 2003 are more likely to spend longer on bikes than older generations with some outliers for people born in 1965. This broadly suggests that people who are between the ages of 18-28 spend longer on bikes. Typically people in this age range are a part of the workforce. Census data shows that 63% of the population over the age of 16 is a part of the civilian work force. Further analysis of the users show that the majority of citibike uses are males. Top starting and ending locations for citibike users are all within the city island. This suggests that people don’t take city bike for very distant traveling making citibike an ideal option for people who commute modest distances to get to work in the city. This all goes to support the theory that that the business model of citibike in New York City is built around subscribers who use the bike primarily to commute to and from work.
### The Logistics
Next, let’s look at the logistics of maintaining a bike sharing service. There are 2,344,224 records in August and 13,983 unique bike records. This is the number of bikes that were in use during this time. There is a large range of total mileage across these bikes ranging from 70 to 3,838,467 miles logged on a bike. These bikes with higher mileage will obviously require maintenance. Different sources recommend maintenance after different amounts of mileage with most being in the several thousand mileage range. If we maintain the top 20% of bikes with the highest mileage every year, that is alot of bike maintenance for New York City. 

## Citibike in Des Moines
Let’s see how the customer base of citibike in New York translates to Des Moines based on 2018 census data. Although the population of Des Moines is smaller, the customer base that supports New York citibike is also present is Des Moines. Approximately 56.9% of the population is between the ages of 18-65 and 70.2% of persons over 16 are a part of the work force. People in the workforce currently spend an average of 19.2 minutes commuting to work. These numbers are conducive to a bike sharing system for several reasons. First, shorter commute times make bike travel more appealing for consumers because it’s less physically taxing on the user and less costly than driving a car. The gender distributions of the two cities are about the same (52.3% in New York to 50.8% in Des Moines) so this will likely not affect the potential usership too much. The business base that exists in New York, exists in Des Moines, making it an attractive option for bikesharing implementation. For comaprision, there are 26 McDonalds in New York City, and 20 McDonalds in Des Moines so other large franchises have seen successful expansion into Des Moines that is almost on the scale of New York. The amount of bikes introduced would be proportional to the population change and therefore maintenance costs would be lower as well considering the population of Des Moines is much lower than that of New York City. The current public transportation options in Des Moines includes a public transit system (DART) that only runs 6 days a week and could not be reliably used to get around eveyr day of the week, and B-cycle (another bike sharing service). Since bike sharing has already been introduced to the market, the cost of consumer education and market education can be bypassed when introducing citibike to Des Moines. B-cycle follows a similar subscription model to citibike and has already proved the market in Des Moines for citibike. Given that car ownership costs the average consumer $11,000 per year in maintenance and gas, while bike ownership costs around $350 a year, citibike is clearly those most cost efficient option for these consumers coming in at around $95 a year for use. The cost incentive will drive consumers to this business. 


### Supplementary Sources
- https://www.dsmpartnership.com/living-here/transportation
- https://www.trekbicyclestoregreensboro.com/tips/recommended-maintenance-chart-pg117.htm
- https://www.treehugger.com/bikes/how-much-does-it-cost-to-commute-by-bike.html
- https://www.cooneyconway.com/bike-share-liability-cost